Here we show that baseline correction can distort pupil-size data. This happens most often when pupil size is unusually small during the baseline period, which in turn happens most often because of eye blinks, data loss, or other distortions. When baseline pupil size is unusually small, baseline-corrected pupil size becomes unusually large. This is a problem for all forms of baseline correction, but is much more pronounced for divisive than subtractive baseline correction. Therefore, subtractive baseline correction (corrected pupil size = pupil size - baseline) is more robust than divisive baseline correction (corrected pupil size = pupil size / baseline).

Despite risk of distortion, it makes sense to perform baseline correction, because it increases statistical power in experiments that investigate the effect of some experimental manipulation on pupil size. In our simulations, subtractive baseline correction increased statistical power more than divisive correction; however, we simulated a fixed difference between conditions that did not depend on baseline pupil size. For such baseline-independent effects, subtractive baseline correction leads to the highest statistical power. But real pupillary responses are always somewhat dependent on baseline pupil size, if only because a baseline pupil of 2 mm cannot constrict much further, nor can a baseline pupil of 8 mm dilate much further. The more important point is therefore that baseline correction in general increases statistical power compared to no baseline correction.

Knowing the risks and the benefits, how can you perform safe and sensible baseline correction and preprocessing of pupil-size data? Based on our observations, we make five recommendations:

1. ++Prior to baseline correction, perform data preprocessing data in a way that is appropriate for your research question, as described in the section *A Preprocessing Primer*.++ However, do not assume that preprocessing leads to perfectly clean data.
2. Use subtractive baseline correction (or some variation thereof); that is, we recommend that on the level of individual trials, baseline pupil size be subtracted from real pupil size. Other transformations can be applied as you see fit, but they should be applied to the aggregate data, and not to individual trials. For example, if you prefer to express pupil size as proportion change, you can divide pupil size by the grand mean pupil size during the baseline period averaged across all trials.
3. Visually compare your baseline-corrected data with your uncorrected data. Baseline correction should reduce variability, but not qualitatively change the overall results.
4. Baseline artifacts manifest themselves as a rapid dilation of the pupil immediately following the baseline period. Given that real effects on pupil size emerge slowly, never within 220 ms of the manipulation, baseline artifacts can be distinguished from real effects by their timing.
5. Plot a histogram of baseline pupil sizes, and use this to visually determine a minimum baseline pupil size, and remove all trials on which baseline pupil size is smaller. We do not recommend using a fixed criterion such as 'remove all baseline pupil sizes that are more than 2.5 standard deviations below the mean'. While this may work in some cases (it would have worked in the real data used here), the distribution of baseline pupil sizes varies, and therefore a fixed criterion may not always catch all problematic trials. We also do not recommended relying on blink detection. Although blinks are the primary reason for unrealistically small baseline pupil sizes, they are not the only reason; furthermore, blinks may not be detected when the eyelid closes only partly or when the recording is noisy. As we've seen, catching all problematic trials is important, because even a handful of trials with baseline artifacts can catastrophically affect the overall results. A visually determined criterion for minimum baseline pupil size is safest.

We and many others have used baseline correction in the past, and some people, including we, have also used divisive baseline correction. In light of this paper, can we still trust these previous results? For the most part: yes. Importantly, baseline artifacts can trigger quantitatively large spurious effects, but these spurious effects are unlikely to be significant, because baseline artifacts also introduce a lot of variance. Therefore, baseline artifacts are more likely to result in false negatives (type II errors) than false positives (type I errors). We have also checked our own previous results [e.g. @Blom2016;@Mathôt2014Exo] and found no signs of baseline artifacts, nor have we found obvious signs of distortion (of this kind) in other published work. Presumably, most researchers check their data visually to make sure that clear outliers are removed; therefore, catastrophic distortion (as shown in %FigSimulation::c,d and %FigRealData::c,d) is likely to be noticed and, in one way or another, corrected. Nevertheless, although problems may be detected and dealt with in an ad hoc fashion, using a safe and sensible approach to begin with is preferable.

In conclusion, we have shown that baseline correction of pupil-size data increases statistical power, but can strongly distort data if there are artifacts (notably eye blinks) during the baseline period. We have made five recommendations for safe and sensible baseline correction, the most important of which are: Use subtractive rather than divisive baseline correction, and check visually whether your baseline-corrected pupil-size data makes sense.
