Pupil size is a continuous signal: a series of values that indicate how pupil size changes over time. In this sense, pupil-size data is similar to electroencephalographic (EEG) data, which indicates how electrical brain activity changes over time; and it is different from most behavioral measures, such as response times, that generally provide only a single value for each trial of the experiment, such as a single response time.

Psychologist are often interested in how pupil size is affected by some experimental manipulation [reviewed in @BeattyLucero2000;@MathôtStigchel2015CurrDir]. To give a classic example, @KahnemanBeatty1966 asked participants to remember a varying number (3-7) of digits. They found that participants' pupils dilated (i.e. became larger) when the participants remembered seven digits, compared to when they remembered only three; that is, memory load caused the pupil to dilate (become bigger).

As was common for pupil-size studies of the time, @KahnemanBeatty1966 expressed their results in millimeters of pupil diameter; that is, they used absolute pupil-size values. But expressing pupil size in absolute values has a disadvantage: It is affected by slow, random fluctuations of pupil size. These fluctuations are a source of noise that reduce statistical power and make it more difficult to detect the effects of interest (in the case of @KahnemanBeatty1966 the effect of memory load). To deal with these fluctuations, researchers often look at the *difference* in pupil size compared to a baseline period, which is typically the start of the trial. By looking at pupil-size changes, rather than absolute pupil sizes, differences in pupil size that already existed before the trial are taken into account, are no longer a source of noise, and no longer reduce statistical power. This is baseline correction.

Baseline correction is thus a way to reduce the impact of random pupil-size fluctuations from one trial to the next; it is *not* a way to control for overall differences in pupil size between participants. Of course, some participants have larger pupils than others [see @Tsukahara2016 for a fascinating study on the relationship between pupil size and intelligence]; and the distance between camera and eye, which varies slightly from participant to participant, also affects pupil size, at least as measured by most eye trackers. But such between-subject differences are better taken into account statistically, through a repeated measures ANOVA or a linear mixed-effects model with by-participant random intercepts [e.g. @Baayen2008JMemLang]—just like between-subject differences in reaction times are usually taken into account. Phrased differently, baseline correction is a way to turn a between-trial design, in which pupil sizes are compared between trials, into a within-trial design, in which pupil sizes are compared between different moments within a single trial.

There are two main ways to apply baseline correction: *divisive*, in which pupil size is converted to a proportional difference from baseline pupil size (corrected pupil size = pupil size / baseline), and *subtractive*, in which pupil size is converted to an absolute difference from baseline pupil size (corrected pupil size = pupil size - baseline). There are variations of these approaches, such as using percentage rather than proportion change, or converting absolute differences from baseline pupil size to z-scores; but these are all minor variations of these two general approaches. Here we will therefore focus on the difference between divisive and subtractive baseline correction.

How do researchers choose between divisive and subtractive baseline correction? We cannot be certain, because a reason for choosing one or the other is never given, at least not in any paper that we've seen. But we are free to speculate. 

Divisive baseline correction is attractive because it provides an intuitive measure: proportion change. If a paper states that an eye movement caused a 10% pupillary constriction [@MathMelmiCastet2015], you can easily judge the size of this effect: substantial but not enormous. In contrast, if a paper states that a manipulation caused a 0.02 mm diameter change [@Bombeke2016], you need a moment to remember (or look up) that human pupils are 2 to 8 mm in diameter, and that a 0.02 mm effect is therefore tiny. This is, in our view, less intuitive. And if the the eye tracker reports pupil size in arbitrary units (typically based on a pixel count of the camera image), then absolute pupil-size differences become even harder to interpret. However, despite these disadvantages, subtractive baseline correction may be the natural choice for some researchers because it is the standard approach in EEG research [e.g. @Gross2013Neuroimage;@Woodman2010AttPerceptPsychophys].

In pupillometry, there is no established standard for applying baseline correction. Based on our experience, most researchers now apply some form of baseline correction [but see e.g. @Gamlin2007VisRes], and variations of subtractive baseline correction [e.g. @LaengSulutvedt2014;@Binda2013JNeurosci;@Murphy2016Plos;@Privitera2010JVis;@Jainta2011;@Koelewijn2012;@Hup2009;@Porter2007;@Knapen2016] seem somewhat more common than variations of divisive baseline correction [@Mathôt2013Plos;@Bonmati2016;@Wilhelm1998;@Herbst2011]. (One paper is listed per research group. This list is anecdotal, and not a comprehensive review.)

As far as we know, no-one has systematically studied baseline correction of pupil-size data. However, baseline correction has been studied in the context of EEG/ MEG data, as shown by a recent debate about whether or not baseline correction of EEG/ MEG data should be abandoned in favor of high-pass filtering [@Tanner2015;@Tanner2016;@Maess2016]. However, pupil-size data is different from EEG/ MEG data. For example, although pupil size fluctuates in cycles of 1-2 s [@Math2015JGen;@Reimer2014Neuron], it does not show the slow systematic drift shown by EEG/ MEG voltages [@Tanner2016]. Also, pupil-size data is strongly affected by eye blinks, which result in full signal loss, preceded and followed by sharply distorted recordings [e.g. @Math2013Simple]. Of course, EEG/ MEG data is also strongly affected by blinks [@HoffmanFalkenstein2008], but not as catastrophically as pupil size is.

Our aim is therefore to do study baseline correction specifically for pupil-size data. We will use real and simulated data to see how robust subtractive and divisive baseline corrections are to noise, and how they affect statistical power. We will not apply any other techniques for improving data quality, such as blink reconstruction or smoothing, because we feel that baseline correction should be safe and sensible on its own. We will end by making several recommendations for baseline correction of pupil-size data.
